Installing Drupal
=================

.. _installation:

See :doc:`01why-drupal` on getting started with Drupal.

---

So welcome back, this is actually the most challenging part of this tutorial -
installing Drupal. I'm assuming no prior web development experience, so the
first part will be installing something to run your tutorial Drupal site on.

For this we'll be using a project called `MAMP <https://www.mamp.info/en/>`_.
MAMP is a package of software that makes it easy to set up Drupal (but not just
Drupal) on your computer. I'll skip the deeper details for now, but head over
to MAMP and download it. You can stick with the free version for now.

note: There are many basically equivalent packages out there for this purpose -
XAMPP, Acquia Dev Desktop. If you'd prefer one of those feel free, but I'll be
using MAMP because it's very simple and is what I got started with.

MAMP
----

This section can be safely skipped if you don't care.

MAMP is basically the same package of software that runs on any webhosting
server, think Dreamhost or GoDaddy. It stands for (M)y (A)pache, (M)ySQL, and
(P)hp. These are the three things that you need to make Drupal work.

Apache is a "webserver". The webserver piece is the one that sits there and
listens for incomcing requests from someone's browser (or bot). When a request
comes in from somewhere, Apache figures out what that request is asking for and
routes it to the correct item. It could be an image, which is very simple
because it's just a file sitting on a disk. In this case, Apache grabs the file
and returns it. This is called "the Request/Response" cycle, and is pretty much
the slab that the internet was built on.

Sometimes however, the request is asking for a webpage in Drupal. This case is
a bit more complex, and that's when PHP and MySQL come into play. PHP is a
programming language. You might know that already, but Drupal is mostly written
in PHP. That's why you need it for this tutorial. When you create a new page on
your new site, the content of that page gets stored not as a file on a disk,
but as a row in a database. MySQL is an exceptionally popular database, and the
one that we'll us for this tutorial.

On to the show
--------------

Hopefully MAMP has finished downloading by this point. Go through the
installer, and when you get done you should be able to open MAMP in the same
way that you'd open any other application. Once it starts up, you should have a
screen that looks basically like this --

.. image:: https://www.mamp.info/en/images/screenshots/en_mamp-start.jpg

Once you click "Start Servers" you've done it! You've built your first
webserver stack!

Under the preferences option, you'll get some options to twiddle with. **Don't
twiddle with them**, at least not yet. Option names will vary, but you're
looking for the rightmost tab, it's either called "Apache" or "Webserver" in
the most recent versions. Under that tab will be a most pertinent piece of
information - the "Document Root".

.. note::

    *Document Root - where the webserver will look for the files that it's trying
    to serve.*

In a nutshell, once we download Drupal, we're going to put all it's files in
that directory so make a note of where that directory is!

Downloading Drupal
------------------

Head on over to `Drupal.org <https://www.drupal.org/download>`_ and download
Drupal! At the time of this writing, that giant green button takes you to
another screen where you are presented with ah choice. I was hoping to shield
my readers from this, but if you're going to learn Drupal I guess now's as good
a time as any to explain why this choice exists at all.

You may skip all of this.

------------
An interlude
------------

Drupal has been around for nigh 12 years at this point. It was started in `a
Dutch kid's <http://buytaert.net/>`_ dorm room as more or less a message board
for that dorm. Early in life it embraced the open source model for development,
which means that other kids in his dorm were able to hack on it and add to it
and improve on it and make it better for everybody.

Many years later Drupal was running some of the largest websites on the
internet, and while it had been added on to and improved by thousands of
developers by that point you could still find some of that 12 year old dorm
code if you looked in the right places. Many people, your author included, felt
disbelief that such code could be responsible for so much, yet at the same time
took great comfort and pride that really anyone could learn this stuff just by
following this code around. There truly was nothing really fancy about Drupal's
codebase for a great many years. A few really smart patterns up front, followed
diligently for years, and the rest is early internet history.

But time marches on, and with it evolution. Standards in computer engineering,
common patterns for solving common problems, and much more complex needs on the
web necessitated engaging with the wider PHP ecosystem. After all, the Easter
Islands were once thriving communities, yet after time they thrived themselves
right out of existence. Drupal wanted to avoid such a fate, so a decision was
made in 2011 to replace some key pieces of Drupal's internal code with more
modern code from a well known PHP framework - `Symfony <https://symfony.com/>`_.

This made a heck of a lot of sense. Much of Drupal's aforementioned dorm code
had very interesting, almost paleological qualities about the way that it
solved problems as if "this was how our ancestors built a fire before we had
matches", and newcomers to Drupal that *did* have a background in software
development were often left scratching their heads to some of the decisions. In
a nutshell, learning Drupal was easier for newcomers to web development than it
was for established developers.

Thus the rather controversial decision was made to standardize some of the very
deepest parts of Drupal - those dealing with the "request/response" cycle.

Thus began a process that took 5 years and involved an almost complete rewrite
of Drupal. This is both shocking and obvious in hindsight, since a complete
rewrite is something you never, ever, ever want to do with a software project,
yet once you modernize a piece of a system, the rest of the system looks that
much more archaic.

The good part - Drupal is a modern and really impressive piece of software
engineering, and includes many more features in the standard install that
you're going to want on your site than previous versions. It's much more
"batteries included" than older versions that required you to download and
install lots of add ons to get it to do the things you really wanted it to do.

The bad part - much of the code that has been written by folks like you and me
over the last decade doesn't work anymore. This is kinda brutal, but such is
evolution. It also opens up something of a goldmine for new development
opportunities within the Drupal ecosystem, but with that comes that learning to
code for Drupal 8 will be a much different experience if you are new to
building software. It'll require you to know what you're doing, which I most
certainly didn't when I was learning Drupal (6).

The other good part - this entire tutorial can be done now with Drupal 8.

So go ahead and download Drupal 8, but once you decide that Drupal is, in fact,
for you you'll probably revisit this topic.

Back to Drupal
--------------

So you've downloaded Drupal 8 - unzip it. You'll have a bunch of files and
folders that look like this inside the newly unzipped directory ::


    Downloads/drupal-8.0.5 [ tree -L 1 ] 4:50 PM . 
    ├── LICENSE.txt 
    ├── README.txt 
    ├── autoload.php 
    ├── composer.json 
    ├── composer.lock 
    ├── core 
    ├── example.gitignore 
    ├── index.php 
    ├── modules 
    ├── profiles 
    ├── robots.txt 
    ├── sites 
    ├── themes 
    ├── update.php 
    ├── vendor 
    └── web.config
    
    6 directories, 10 files 


All those files go in "The Docroot" - which is the path that you noted earlier
in your MAMP preferences under Apache/Webserver/whatever. It'll end in
`htdocs`, so something like `/Applications/MAMP/htdocs` if you're on a Mac, or
whatever that screen says if you're not.

The big payoff
--------------

Something always goes funny with people's computers, but at this point you
should be able to navigate your browser to localhost:8888 and be greeted with
the Drupal installation screen.

.. image:: https://www.acquia.com/sites/default/files/installd8.png

We're going to be choosing all the defaults for this tutorial, click through
the language and the next option is for "installation profile", just choose
Standard.

The next screen - "System Requirements" - is the tricky one. Ask below in the
comments and we'll try to debug it together if you aren't allowed through. MAMP
should have all this sorted out for you already, though so soldier on.

The next and basically final step is to give Drupal the connection credentials
to your MySQL database. Those can be found on the welcome webpage if you click
that middle button in MAMP. That'll take you to a screen that tells you for
sure, but it should be something like::

    user: root 
    pass: root 
    host: localhost (open up the advanced options) 
    port: 8889 (leave the table prefix empty) 


At this point, you're in. You've installed Drupal. There is one more
configuration screen that you can plug all the answers into on your own.

Save and continue on to [the fun part of the
tutorial](/posts/280-first-steps-drupal/)!
